fifteen years ago I volunteered to
participate in a research study that
involved a genetic test when I arrived
at the clinic to be tested I was handed
a questionnaire one of the very first
questions asked me to check a box for my
race white black Asian or Native
American I wasn't quite sure how to
answer the question was it aimed at
measuring the diversity of research
participants social backgrounds in that
case I would answer with my social
identity and check the box for black but
what if the researchers were interested
in investigating some association
between ancestry and the risk for
certain genetic traits in that case
wouldn't they want to know something
about my ancestry which is just as much
European as African and how could they
make scientific findings about my genes
if I put down my social identity as a
black woman after all I consider myself
a black woman with a white father rather
than a white woman with a black mother
entirely for social reasons which racial
identity I check has nothing to do with
my genes well despite the obvious
importance of this question to the study
scientific validity I was told don't
worry about it just put down however you
identify yourself so I checked black but
I had no confidence in the results of a
study that treated a critical variable
so unscientifically that personal
experience with the use of race and
genetic testing got me thinking where
else in medicine is race used to make
false biological predictions well I
found out
race runs deeply throughout all of
medical practice it shapes physicians
diagnosis measurements treatments
prescriptions even the very definition
of diseases and the more I found out the
more disturbed I became sociologists
like me have long explained that race is
a social construction when we identify
people as black white Asian Native
American Latina we're referring to
social groupings with made-up
demarcations that have changed over time
and vary around the world as a legal
scholar I've also studied how lawmakers
not biologists have invented the legal
definitions of races and it's not just
the view of social scientists you
remember when the map of the human
genome was unveiled at a White House
ceremony in June 2000 President Bill
Clinton famously declared I believe one
of the great truths to emerge from this
triumphant expedition inside the human
genome is that in genetic terms human
beings regardless of race are more than
99.9 percent the same and he might have
added that that less than 1% of genetic
difference doesn't fall into racial
boxes Francis Collins who led the human
genome project and now heads NIH echoed
President Clinton I am happy that today
the only race we're talking about is the
human race doctors are supposed to
practice evidence-based medicine and
they're increasingly called to join the
genomic revolution but their habit of
treating patients by race lags far
behind
take the estimate of glomerular
filtration rate or GFR doctors routinely
interpret GFR this important indicator
of kidney function
by race as you can see in this lab test
the exact same creatinine level the
concentration in the blood of the
patient automatically produces a
different GFR estimate depending on
whether or not the patient is
african-american why I've been told it's
based on an assumption that African
Americans have more muscle mass than
people of other races but what sense
does it make for a doctor to
automatically assume I have more muscle
mass than that female bodybuilder
wouldn't it be far more accurate and
evidence-based to determine the muscle
mass of individual patients just by
looking at them well doctors tell me
they're using race as a shortcut it's a
crude but convenient proxy for more
important factors like muscle mass
enzyme level genetic traits they just
don't have time to look for but race is
a bad proxy in many cases race adds no
relevant information at all it's just a
distraction but race also tends to
overwhelm the clinical measures it
blinds doctors to patients symptoms
family illnesses their history their own
illness as they might have all more
evidence based than the patient's race
race can't substitute for these
important clinical measures without
sacrificing patient well-being doctors
also tell me race is just one of many
factors they take into account but their
numerous medical tests like the GFR that
use race categorically to treat black
white Asian patients different
just because of their race race medicine
also leaves patients of color especially
vulnerable to harmful biases and
stereotypes black and Latino patients
are twice as likely to receive no pain
medication as whites for the same
painful long bone fractures because of
stereotypes that black and brown people
feel less pain exaggerate their pain and
are predisposed to drug addiction the
Food and Drug Administration has even
approved a race specific medicine it's a
pill called vital to treat heart failure
in self-identified African American
patients a cardiologist developed this
drug without regard to race or genetics
but it became convenient for commercial
reasons to market the drug to black
patients the FDA then allowed the
company the drug company to test the
efficacy in a clinical trial that only
included African American subjects it
speculated that race stood in as a proxy
for some unknown genetic factor that
effects heart disease or response to
drugs but think about the dangerous
message it sent that black people's
bodies are so substandard a drug tested
in them is not guaranteed to work in
other patients in the end the drug
company's marketing scheme failed for
one thing black patients were
understandably wary of using a drug just
for black people one elderly black woman
stood up in a community meeting and
shouted give me what the white people
are taking
and if you find race-specific Medicine
surprising wait till you learn that many
doctors in the United States still use
an updated version of a diagnostic tool
that was developed by a physician during
the slavery era a diagnostic tool that
is tightly linked to justifications for
slavery
dr. Samuel Cartwright graduated from the
University of Pennsylvania Medical
School he practiced in the deep south
before the Civil War and he was a well
known expert on what was then called
Negro medicine he promoted the racial
concept of disease that people of
different races suffer from different
diseases and experienced common diseases
differently Cartwright argued in the
1850s that slavery was beneficial for
black people for medical reasons
he claimed that because black people
have lower lung capacity than whites
forced labor was good for them he wrote
in a medical journal it is the red vital
blood sent to the brain that liberates
their minds when under the white man's
control and it is the one of sufficiency
of red vital blood that changed their
minds to ignorant and barbarism when in
freedom to support this theory
Cartwright helped to perfect a medical
device for measuring breathing called
the spirometer to show the presumed
efficiency in black people's lungs today
doctors still uphold Cartwright's claim
that black people as a race have lower
lung capacity than white people
some even use a modern-day spirometer
that actually has a button labeled race
so the machine adjusts the measurement
for each patient according to his or
her race it's a well-known function
called correcting for race the problem
with race medicine extends far beyond
misdiagnosing patients its focus on
innate racial differences in disease
diverts attention and resources from the
social determinants that cause appalling
racial gaps in health lack of access to
high-quality medical care food deserts
in poor neighborhoods exposure to
environmental toxins high rates of
incarceration and experiencing the
stress of racial discrimination you see
race is not a biological category that
naturally produces these health
disparities because of genetic
difference race is a social category
that has staggering biological
consequences but because of the impact
of social inequality on people's health
yet race medicine pretends the answer to
these gaps in health can be found in a
race specific pill it's much easier and
more lucrative to market a technological
fix for these gaps in health then to
deal with the structural inequities that
produce them the reason I'm so
passionate about ending race medicine
isn't just because it's bad medicine I'm
also on this mission because the way
doctors practice medicine continues to
promote a false and toxic view of
humanity despite the many visionary
breakthroughs in medicine we've been
learning about there's a failure of
imagination when it comes to race would
you imagine with me just a moment what
would happen if doctors stopped treating
patients by race
suppose they rejected an
eighteenth-century classification system
and incorporated instead the most
advanced knowledge of human genetic
diversity and unity that human beings
cannot be categorized into biological
races what if instead of using race as a
crude proxy for some more important
factor doctors actually investigated and
addressed that more important factor
what if doctors joined the forefront of
a movement to end the structural
inequities caused by racism not by
genetic difference race medicine is bad
medicine it's poor science and it's a
false interpretation of humanity it is
more urgent than ever to finally abandon
this backward legacy and to affirm our
common humanity by ending the social
inequalities that truly divide us thank
you
[Applause]